The typical maintenance process resembles a miniature version of the systems 
development life cycle. A systems request for maintenance work is submitted and 
evaluated. If it is accepted, the request is prioritized and scheduled for the IT group. 
The maintenance team then follows a logical progression of investigation, analysis, 
design, development, testing, and implementation.
 Corrective maintenance projects occur when a user or an IT staff member reports 
a problem. Standard maintenance procedures usually are followed for relatively 
minor errors, but work often begins immediately when users report significant errors.
 In contrast to corrective maintenance, adaptive, perfective, and preventive mainte
nance projects always follow the organization’s standard maintenance procedures. 
Adaptive maintenance projects occur in response to user requests for improvements 
to meet changes in the business or operating environments. The IT staff usually initi
ates perfective maintenance projects to improve performance or maintainability. 
Automated program restructuring and reengineering are forms of perfective mainte
nance. In order to avoid future problems, IT staff perform preventive maintenance, 
which involves analysis of areas where trouble is likely to occur.
 A maintenance team consists of one or more systems analysts and programmers. 
Systems analysts need the same talents and abilities for maintenance work as they use 
when developing a new system. Many IT departments are organized into separate 
new development and maintenance groups where staff members are rotated from one 
group to the other.
 Configuration management is necessary to handle maintenance requests, to man
age different versions of the information system, and to distribute documentation 
changes. Maintenance changes can be implemented as they are completed or a release 
methodology can be used in which all noncritical maintenance changes are collected 
and implemented simultaneously. A release methodology usually is cost effective and 
advantageous for users because they do not have to work with a constantly changing 
system. Systems analysts use functional, allocated, and product baselines as formal 
reference points to measure system characteristics at a specific time.
 System performance measurements include response time, bandwidth, throughput, 
and turnaround time. Capacity management uses those measurements to forecast 
what is needed to provide future levels of service and support. Also, CASE tools that 
include system evaluation and maintenance features can be used during the systems 
operation, security, and support phase.
 Security is a vital part of every information system. System security is dependent 
upon a comprehensive security policy that defines how organizational assets are to be 
protected and how attacks are to be responded to.
 Risk management creates a workable security policy by identifying, analyzing, 
anticipating, and reducing risks to an acceptable level. Because information systems 
face a wide array of threats and attacks, six separate but interrelated security levels 
should be analyzed: physical security, network security, application security, file secu
rity, user security, and procedural security. Physical security concerns the physical 
environment, including critical equipment located in a computer room, as well as 
safeguards for servers and desktops throughout the company. Network security 
involves encryption techniques, as well as private networks and other protective mea
sures, especially where wireless transmissions are concerned. Application security 
requires an understanding of services, hardening, application permissions, input vali
dation techniques, software patches and updates, and software logs. File security 
involves the use of encryption and permissions, which can be assigned to individual 
users or to user groups. User security involves identity management techniques, a 
comprehensive password protection policy, an awareness of social engineering risks, 
and an effective means of overcoming user resistance. Procedural security involves 
managerial controls and policies that ensure secure operations.
Data backup and recovery issues include backup media, backup schedules, and 
retention periods, as well as backup designs such as RAID and cloud-based 
backups.
 All information systems eventually become obsolete. The end of a system’s 
economic life usually is signaled by rapidly increasing maintenance or operating  
costs, the availability of new software or hardware, or new requirements that cannot 
be achieved easily by the existing system. When a certain point is reached, an 
information system must be replaced, and the entire systems development life cycle 
begins again.
 Many IT experts predict intense competition in the future, along with economic, 
political, and social uncertainty. Facing these challenges, top IT priorities will be  
the safety and security of corporate operations, environmental concerns, and  
bottom-line TCO.
 An IT professional should have a strategic career plan that includes long-term 
goals and intermediate milestones. An important element of a personal strategic plan 
is the acquisition of IT credentials and certifications that document specific knowl
edge and skills. Many IT industry leaders offer certification. In addition to technical 
ability, other skills, such as critical thinking skills, also are extremely valuable.
